Add a generator troubleshooting page (#2772)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/operations/troubleshooting/metrics-generator.md

---

> title: Troubleshoot Metrics Generator
> menuTitle: Metrics Generator

Reviewer: Sorry, I missed this before. We're using sentence case. Using what we have in the other metrics-generator doc, Ii'm adding a suggestion to make this lower case and hyphenated for the title and sentence case for the menuTitle. 

```suggestion
title: Troubleshoot metrics-generator
menuTitle: Metrics-generator
```

description: Gain an understanding of how to debug metrics quality issues.
weight: 500
---

> 

Reviewer: Consider adding a first-leveling heading for the page. This heading should match the page title. 
```suggestion
# Troubleshoot metrics-generator

```

> 
> If you are concerned with data quality issues in the metrics generator, we'd first recommend:

Reviewer: Consider adding a first-leveling heading for the page. This heading should match the page title. Also, our other doc uses metrics-generator with a hyphen. Is the official name metrics-generator or metrics generator? (I think I've seen both used.)

```suggestion

# Troubleshoot metrics-generator

If you are concerned with data quality issues in the metrics-generator, we'd first recommend:
```

Author: > Is the official name metrics-generator or metrics generator?

I would say that it's "metrics generator" but it is often written `metrics-generator` for use in yaml/helm/jsonnet/config etc.

- Reviewing your telemetry pipeline to determine the number of dropped spans. We are only looking for major issues here.
- Reviewing the [service graph documentation]({{< relref "../../metrics-generator/service_graphs" >}}) to understand how they are built.

> If everything seems ok from these two perspectives consider the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If everything seems ok from these two perspectives, consider the following topics to help resolve general issues with all metrics and span metrics specifically.
```

## All metrics

### Dropped spans in the distributor

> The distributor has a queue of outgoing spans to the metrics generators. If that queue is full then the distributor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distributor has a queue of outgoing spans to the metrics-generators. If that queue is full then the distributor
```

will drop spans before they reach the generator. Use the following metric to determine if that is happening:

```
sum(rate(tempo_distributor_queue_pushes_failures_total{}[1m]))
```

### Failed pushes to the generator

> For any number of reasons the distributor can fail a push to the generators. Use the following metric to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For any number of reasons, the distributor can fail a push to the generators. Use the following metric to
```

determine if that is happening:

```
sum(rate(tempo_distributor_metrics_generator_pushes_failures_total{}[1m]))
```

### Discarded spans in the generator

> Spans are rejected from being considered by the metrics generator by a configurable slack time as well as due to user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spans are rejected from being considered by the metrics-generator by a configurable slack time as well as due to user
```

configurable filters. You can see the number of spans rejected by reason using this metric:

```
sum(rate(tempo_metrics_generator_spans_discarded_total{}[1m])) by (reason)
```

If you are dropping a lot of spans due to your filters, you will need to adjust them. If you are dropping a lot of spans
due to the ingestion slack time, consider adjusting this setting:

```
metrics_generator:
  metrics_ingestion_time_range_slack: 30s
```

### Max active series

> The generator protects itself and your remote write target by having a maximum number of series it will produce. To 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generator protects itself and your remote-write target by having a maximum number of series it will produce. To 
```

> The generator protects itself and your remote write target by having a maximum number of series it will produce. To 
> determine if series are being dropped due to this limit check:

Reviewer: Clarifying "it" in the first sentence. The antecedent for "it" is series, but I think we're referring to the metrics-generator.
```suggestion
The generator protects itself and your remote-write target by having a maximum number of series the generator produces.  
Use the `sum` below to determine if series are being dropped due to this limit:
```

```
sum(rate(tempo_metrics_generator_registry_series_limited_total{}[1m]))
```

Use the following setting to update the limit:

```
overrides:
  metrics_generator_max_active_series: 0
```

### Remote write failures

> For any number of reasons the generator may fail a write to the remote write target. Use the following metrics to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For any number of reasons, the generator may fail a write to the remote write target. Use the following metrics to
```

determine if that is happening:

```
sum(rate(prometheus_remote_storage_samples_failed_total{}[1m]))
sum(rate(prometheus_remote_storage_samples_dropped_total{}[1m]))
```

## Service graph metrics

Service graphs have additional configuration which can impact the quality of the output metrics. 

### Expired edges

The following metrics can be used to determine how many edges are failing to find a match.

Rate of edges that have expired without a match:
```
sum(rate(tempo_metrics_generator_processor_service_graphs_expired_edges{}[1m]))
```

Rate of all edges:
```
sum(rate(tempo_metrics_generator_processor_service_graphs_edges{}[1m]))
```

If you are seeing a large number of edges expire without a match, consider adjusting the `wait` setting. This
controls how long the metrics generator waits to find a match before it gives up.

```
metrics_generator:
  processor:
    service_graphs:
      wait: 10s
```

### Service graph max items

> In order to limit the total amount of memory that the service graph processor uses there is a maximum number
> of edges it will track at once. To determine if edges are being dropped due to this limit check:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The service graph processor has a maximum number of edges it will track at once to limit the total amount of memory the processors uses.
To determine if edges are being dropped due to this limit, check:
```

## All metrics

### Dropped spans in the distributor

The distributor has a queue of outgoing spans to the metrics-generators. If that queue is full then the distributor
will drop spans before they reach the generator. Use the following metric to determine if that is happening:

```
sum(rate(tempo_distributor_queue_pushes_failures_total{}[1m]))
```

### Failed pushes to the generator

For any number of reasons, the distributor can fail a push to the generators. Use the following metric to
determine if that is happening:

```
sum(rate(tempo_distributor_metrics_generator_pushes_failures_total{}[1m]))
```

### Discarded spans in the generator

Spans are rejected from being considered by the metrics-generator by a configurable slack time as well as due to user
configurable filters. You can see the number of spans rejected by reason using this metric:

```
sum(rate(tempo_metrics_generator_spans_discarded_total{}[1m])) by (reason)
```

If a lot of spans are dropped in the metrics-generator due to your filters, you will need to adjust them. If spans are dropped

> due to the ingestion slack time, consider adjusting this setting:

Reviewer 2: Should we mention here latency in their tracing pipeline might be too high? E.g. they might want to check if they have large buffers configured that slow down ingest.

If we simply recommend people to "increase this value until it works" it defeats the purpose of adding it.

```
metrics_generator:
  metrics_ingestion_time_range_slack: 30s
```

### Max active series

The generator protects itself and your remote-write target by having a maximum number of series the generator produces.  
Use the `sum` below to determine if series are being dropped due to this limit:

```
sum(rate(tempo_metrics_generator_registry_series_limited_total{}[1m]))
```

Use the following setting to update the limit:

```
overrides:
  metrics_generator_max_active_series: 0

> ```

Reviewer 2: I'd add a note here saying that the total active series will be equal to max_active_series x #replicas and that scaling up the generators will increase this total.
I know this is a troubleshooting page and this isn't strictly something that would break metrics generation, but I think it's important to understand what this knob does.

### Remote write failures

For any number of reasons, the generator may fail a write to the remote write target. Use the following metrics to
determine if that is happening:

```
sum(rate(prometheus_remote_storage_samples_failed_total{}[1m]))
sum(rate(prometheus_remote_storage_samples_dropped_total{}[1m]))

> ```

Reviewer 2: There are also exemplar versions of these metrics. Might be worth mentioning as well

```
sum(rate(prometheus_remote_storage_exemplars_failed_total{}[1m]))
sum(rate(prometheus_remote_storage_exemplars_dropped_total{}[1m]))
```

---
title: Troubleshoot Metrics Generator
menuTitle: Metrics Generator
description: Gain an understanding of how to debug metrics quality issues.
weight: 500
---

If you are concerned with data quality issues in the metrics generator, we'd first recommend:

- Reviewing your telemetry pipeline to determine the number of dropped spans. We are only looking for major issues here.
- Reviewing the [service graph documentation]({{< relref "../../metrics-generator/service_graphs" >}}) to understand how they are built.

If everything seems ok from these two perspectives consider the following.

## All metrics

Spans are rejected from being considered by the metrics generator by a configurable slack time as well as due to user
configurable filters. You can see the number of spans rejected by reason using this metric:

```
sum(rate(tempo_metrics_generator_spans_discarded_total{}[1m])) by (reason)
```

If you are dropping a lot of spans due to your filters, you will need to adjust them. If you are dropping a lot of spans

> due to the ingestion slack time consider adjusting this setting:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
due to the ingestion slack time, consider adjusting this setting:
```
